Web Sites
1. https://web.archive.org/web/20110219163448/http://howtohft.wordpress.com/2011/02/15/how-to-build-a-fast-limit-order-book/
2. https://web.archive.org/web/20110219163418/http://howtohft.wordpress.com/2011/02/15/building-a-trading-system-general-considerations/
3. https://medium.com/@simomenaldo/limit-order-book-structure-2aed9971e998

Transcript From YouTube Video
    Hello everybody and welcome back to the
    channel. Today we'll be racing against
    my bowels because I have about 15
    minutes until I have explosive diarrhea.
    So, let's get this video underway. Uh,
    today I will be doing the low-level
    design of an order book. Uh, if you
    don't know what an order book is, I'm
    going to teach you. And on the event
    that this happens to turn you into a
    Jordan Belffort type, please do send
    some help my way. I'll greatly
    appreciate it. And for legal reasons,
    that was a joke. Okay, let's get into
    this. All righty. So let's go over what
    a limit order book is. Uh we'll go over
    some design decisions that we might make
    when implementing this. Uh it is more of
    an algorithmic problem maybe more than
    anything, but I don't really think there
    are too many good videos actually
    covering how to do kind of the class
    design that you would want for an order
    book. And so I'm going to try and go
    into that and uh explore it with a
    little bit of depth. Okay. So what is a
    limit order book? Well, let's imagine
    that we're only considering one stock
    for now because in reality there's going
    to be different order books for every
    single stock. But the general gist of
    this is that an order book basically
    keeps track of all the open orders. When
    you're trying to buy or sell a stock,
    sometimes there's not somebody else who
    wants to buy or sell that stock and take
    the other side of the trade. Uh when
    that happens, your basically unfilled
    order goes into the order book. And
    there are two sides of the order book.
    There's the ask side and the bid side.
    The ask side basically represents all of
    the open selling orders. Meaning, let's
    say I had 100 shares of an Apple stock
    and I wanted to sell them. That would go
    in the ask side of the order book until
    that half of the order was filled. And
    then same with bidding. Let's say I
    wanted to buy 50 shares of Google. Well,
    then that would go in basically the bid
    side of the book until someone else
    basically went ahead and sold me 50
    shares. So like I've said on the slide
    here, we have basically the prices and
    the corresponding volumes which is just
    the number of shares that people who
    have not yet had their order filled want
    to buy and sell of a stock. And there
    are a few rules to this order book
    basically for you know when new
    potential trades are coming in how they
    would actually go ahead and get filled.
    So, as you can see, we have our
    basically bid and ask side of the book.
    And a trade is going to be made if the
    highest bid is greater than or equal to
    the lowest ask, meaning that the spread
    has been crossed. So, the spread is
    basically the term for the difference
    between the lowest ask and the highest
    bid. And so, when they cross, it means
    that there's someone who's actually
    willing to pay uh greater than or equal
    to the amount that someone is willing to
    sell at. And so a trade is going to be
    initiated and that volume is going to be
    removed from the order book. Now what if
    it's the case that one side was in the
    order book already and the other side
    basically initiates the trade. Well, the
    price that that order is going to uh
    basically happen at is the price of the
    order that was already in the book. So
    keep that in mind. That's one rule we
    have to talk about. Um, another one is
    actually going to be the fact that
    basically, um, if orders are all going
    to be, you know, basically if an order
    comes in that crosses the spread and
    there are multiple orders on the other
    side or there are multiple basically
    open orders on the other side that could
    fail an order with that, you're going to
    ultimately uh perform the trade with the
    open order that came in first. So, we're
    going to be doing those in chronological
    order. it implies we'll have to be using
    some sort of Q or something along those
    lines down the line based on a
    timestamp. Okay, so let's move onwards.
    You can read the slide for you know more
    details about the rules but I hope that
    explains things. Okay, so let's think
    about our order book interface. So let's
    we'll we'll first do a basic order book
    and then uh towards the end of the video
    I'll explain some possible expansions to
    the problem and touch upon those a
    little bit. But this is going to be our
    main functionality that we care about
    the most. So the interface that I wanted
    to define and the reason I'm doing this
    as an interface is because there are
    multiple possible implementations of our
    order book is going to have three main
    methods. We have one to place an order
    and so placing an order is basically
    going to do the following. It's going to
    try and fill that order meaning it's
    going to try and find an open order in
    the order book that can be combined with
    it to make a trade. or if you can't make
    a series of trades due to that order
    that was just placed, then you're going
    to go ahead and place that in the order
    book and maybe down the line that trade
    will actually go down. Um, we also have
    this option to cancel an order. Like I
    said, sometimes orders are going to be
    placed but not actually filled, and
    they'll go in the open order book.
    Cancelelling that order will make sure
    that you won't actually be able to fill
    that order in the future if it has yet
    to be filled. If it has been filled,
    that's just a no op. And then finally,
    we also want to be able to get the
    volume at a price point for a given side
    of the trade. So let's say I want to see
    all right, how many people are currently
    selling the stock Apple for $50 or not
    how many people, but rather how many
    shares are being sold at the price of
    $50. We could then go ahead and easily
    get this uh by calling our get volume at
    price method. Okay, so let's also uh
    obviously we need to basically
    encapsulate the state of an actual
    order. Um, and so I went ahead and
    listed out some fields that would be
    useful in something like an order class.
    Um, having an order class is useful for
    a variety of reasons. Technically, the
    state isn't going to be changing too
    much. So, it's possible that we don't
    need a class. We could maybe use some
    different data structure like a
    dictionary to represent this, but at the
    end of the day, being able to kind of
    abstract this away in a class is good
    for, you know, putting it in other data
    structures. For example, something like
    a Q or a linked list or a heap or
    anything along those lines. It's nice to
    have kind of a node structure that we
    can abstract an order away with. So,
    we're going to have an order ID. We're
    going to have a time stamp. We're going
    to have a side that is part of our buy
    or sell enum. So, I'm just going to
    assume side is buy or sell. Uh we're
    also going to have a price, which is
    going to be a double or a float. Uh we
    will have a volume, which is the number
    of shares that's either being, you know,
    sold or bought. And then also a client
    name. That's just going to be useful for
    when we're actually printing out a trade
    that has executed. And again, you know,
    obviously I've made these all private.
    So I'm assuming that in an actual class
    you would have public getters and
    setters uh just for the purposes of, you
    know, kind of making sure that you can't
    actually access the instance variables
    of this class.
    Okay, so let's go ahead and think about
    some sort of data structures for our
    limit order book because this is
    ultimately going to be a pretty complex
    problem and there's not only one way
    that you can do this, but I'm going to
    touch upon one possible implementation.
    And if you guys have any other ideas in
    the comments, feel free to go ahead and
    comment those. I'd be interested to see
    what you guys can come up with as well.
    But as far as I'm aware, this is one of
    the more common ways of implementing it.
    So basically, we know when an order
    comes in, let's imagine that we're
    submitting a buy order, right? So I want
    to buy 50 shares of Google. The first
    thing that we're going to do is go ahead
    and look at the lowest price of the sell
    side of the limit book, right? Because I
    want to see what people are willing to
    sell Google for. If I'm willing to buy
    Google shares at a price that's greater
    than or equal to that lowest sell price,
    then we're going to execute a trade. And
    if I wasn't able to buy all the shares
    that I wanted, I'm going to keep
    checking the sell limit order book in
    order of the lowest prices to see if I
    can make even more trades. So,
    obviously, we're going to have some sort
    of while loop in our logic. And keep in
    mind as well that I basically just told
    you guys the way that I'm looking at uh
    the limit order book in terms of who I'm
    going to actually execute my trade with
    is in terms of the price point. Right? I
    am prioritizing uh open orders that have
    the lowest price. So what would be
    really good for this would be a priority
    queue which is often implemented by a
    min heap. uh so it would be really
    useful to kind of represent the sell
    side of the order book with a min heap
    so that that way I can quickly see
    what's the lowest price that I can buy
    shares at and similarly uh you can also
    implement the buy side of the order book
    with a max heap so that you can quickly
    see what is the highest price that
    someone's willing to buy shares of a
    stock at. And so now we basically have
    this structure of two heaps. We have a
    min heap for our sell side. We have a
    max heap for our buy side. And in
    addition, uh, it actually gets a little
    bit more complicated. But keep in mind,
    and sorry there's a typo on the slide. I
    said n login inserts and pops. It's
    actually login where n is the number of
    nodes in the heap. But what actually are
    our nodes in the heap? It's not actually
    going to be so simple as to just say
    that, hey, we have just a bunch of order
    nodes in our heaps, right? because we
    actually said to ourselves, hey, we know
    that um we basically have all these
    orders, but there can be many orders at
    the same price point, right? I might
    want to buy 50 shares of Apple, and
    then, you know, my friend also might
    want to buy 50 shares of Apple. And so,
    we would go in the heap in the same
    place. But I've already said that, you
    know, if there are two people willing to
    buy shares at the same price, the one
    who gets priority is the one that
    actually submitted their order earlier,
    meaning they have an earlier time stamp.
    So what we could actually do, we have a
    couple options here. Uh, one option is
    to just go ahead and make our heaps
    based on both the price and the time
    stamp, but it is actually a little bit
    algorithmically faster if we were to use
    a queue. The reasoning for this being
    that now we're not adding a bunch of
    extra nodes to our heap, which uh goes
    around in kind of logarithmic time, but
    rather we can have um basically a heap
    of Q's where the Q's are representing
    just one price level for an open order.
    And then within those cues we have
    actually the basically the order nodes
    themselves uh in the order that they
    were submitted. Right? So it means that
    pulling from the beginning of the queue
    is going to show you the earliest order
    and then we're going to get the things
    that we want. Right? So now we finally
    satisfied our requirement of being able
    to look through those heaps in the
    proper order and also if there's a
    tiebreaker we can settle it using that
    time stamp field.
    Okay. So now we have basically these two
    heaps right? Right? We have our max heap
    and our min heap. And each of those
    heaps is made up of a bunch of different
    cues and those cues contain orders.
    Right? So this is already getting pretty
    complicated and I understand that and I
    empathize with you there, but it's only
    getting worse because we mentioned that
    we need volume. So volume is basically
    saying what is the open amount of shares
    that uh people either want to buy or
    want to sell at a given price. And so
    right now we know that all of the orders
    at a given price are represented by
    basically being part of a que. And
    that's all good and well. However, uh
    it's not very efficient time-wise. And
    we know that we want to make our
    algorithmic complexity as low as
    possible during the course of this
    problem because in an actual market
    exchange or a stock exchange, it's super
    important to make things super fast or
    else they're going to be inefficiencies
    that people can take advantage of. So we
    want our volume to basically be running
    as fast as possible. And right now our
    volume or at least calculating it would
    be an O of N. The reason for this being
    that we have to iterate through a Q at a
    given price point and add up the sums of
    the number of shares that each order
    wants. So instead what we can actually
    do is as opposed to um kind of lazily
    figuring out what the volume is, we can
    actually premputee it and we can do this
    by maintaining a hashmap. So the hashmap
    is going to basically take in a tupil as
    a key where the tupil is both the price
    that we care about and also the side.
    So, buying or selling. And every single
    time that we add an order to our limit
    order book, we can go ahead and
    increment the volume available for that
    order's price inside in the hashmap. And
    if we were to ever remove an order from
    the limit order book because either it
    was filled or it was canceled, we can go
    ahead and remove the corresponding
    volume amount in our hashmap. So, that's
    just an extra thing to keep keep up
    with. Okay.
    Next, we have cancellations.
    cancellations is probably where this
    problem gets, I would say, the most
    challenging in terms of actually going
    ahead and thinking through the
    trade-offs that we need to make. And
    there are a couple of possible ways that
    we can cancel an order. We can kind of
    actively do it or we can lazily do it.
    So the active way that we can do this is
    um we basically go ahead and take the
    node representing an order and we simply
    remove it from the queue that it's a
    part of and effectively remove it from
    the heap. So we're now no longer ever
    going to consider it for filling future
    orders. So, uh, this is really good in
    the sense that, um, it means that there
    are going to potentially be fewer things
    in the heap, right? Uh, if we emptied an
    entire queue out because all of the
    nodes are canceled in it. Now, we can go
    ahead and remove that Q from our heap.
    And as a result, even though all the
    operations in the heap are log n, n is
    going to be smaller. So, that is going
    to give us a time complexity advantage
    for future operations. But basically by
    actively removing things from the heap,
    it also means that uh we're incurring
    extra time complexity whenever we do a
    cancellation. So the first thing is that
    we're going to be removing a node from a
    queue, right? Because we have a heap of
    Q's of order objects. And so we're
    removing an order object from that Q. Uh
    we know that removing arbitrary nodes
    from Q's is actually an O of N time
    complexity. However, there are
    optimizations that we can make in order
    to improve this. For example, instead of
    just using a Q with a linked list
    implementation, we can implement our Q
    via a doubly linked list with a hashmap,
    which I've covered plenty in prior
    videos. And by doing so, uh, we can
    basically use our hashmap in order to
    get the location of the node and then
    remove it in O of one time. So that does
    save some time complexity there, but it
    still doesn't stop the fact that if we
    ultimately have to remove the
    corresponding que from the heap because
    you know there's no more order objects
    in that queue, meaning all the orders at
    that price point are no longer
    available. Now we have to remove that Q
    from the heap and that is going to be a
    log and removal assuming that we know
    the location of the Q in the heap, which
    is only going to happen if we have a
    hashmap pointing to it. So again, this
    is, you know, getting very
    algorithmically complex at this point.
    The other option that we actually have
    uh allows us to not remove anything from
    the heap uh unless it's actually going
    to be popped from the top of it. This is
    because we could lazily mark orders as
    canceled by basically just setting a
    field in them called cancelled and then
    as we run through our cues during our
    our while loop as we check for orders to
    potentially fill. Uh if we see that an
    order is marked as canceled, we just go
    ahead and skip over it. Um, so this does
    have some uh time complexity advantages
    in the sense that we'll never have to
    remove anything from the middle of the
    heap. But it also does mean that if
    there's a lot of cancellations, we may
    just constantly be popping nodes from
    the heap. Uh, taking a good look at them
    and saying, actually, you know what, we
    no longer uh want to consider you
    anymore now. We just have to move on.
    So, we're going to add time complexity
    there. And in addition uh by not
    actively removing empty cues from our
    heap uh we're also going to have more
    nodes in the heap. And again like I said
    before even though the time complexity
    of a heap is always O of log N is going
    to be larger because there may be some
    empty Q's in there.
    Okay let's go ahead and put this all
    together. So I'm actually going to go
    ahead and implement everything that I've
    just spoken about so that I can
    materialize it for you guys and it makes
    a little bit more sense. And
    additionally, one of the things that I
    want to do is um kind of do the active
    cancellation method, not the lazy one.
    Uh so you guys can see how that would
    work in reality. So let's go through the
    fields of the order book itself and we
    can go ahead and work out what we have.
    So we have our min heap for the best ask
    part of the order book. We've got our
    max heap for the best bid part of the
    order book. Uh we have a hashmap from
    order ID to order and that's I'm going
    to call order map. It's going to allow
    us to cancel orders pretty easily. We
    also have a volume map which like I said
    before is keyed by um basically a price
    and a side. And then we also have a Q
    map which is basically saying find the
    corresponding Q that's part of a heap uh
    as keyed by price and side yet again.
    And that's going to allow us to easily
    remove Q's from a heap in log end time
    as opposed to linear time. Okay. So
    we've got our place order method. So the
    first thing we're going to do is figure
    out what the opposite side of the book
    is. So, if I'm buying, the opposite book
    would be sell. Uh, and if I'm selling,
    the opposite side of the book would be
    buying. I'm doing the same thing for the
    same side of the book. And then I'm also
    placing our new order that's going to be
    placed in our order map. Okay. Now, this
    is kind of the the crux of everything.
    We're going through our while loop and
    basically filling it as long as there's
    volume in our order. We're saying while
    there is order volume, while the
    opposite book isn't empty, and while the
    first order to be filled in the opposite
    book, aka the one with the best price
    for us, has volume, we're going to go
    ahead and actually figure out the other
    order, which is just going to be at the
    top of the other heap. Uh, we're going
    to figure out the trade price, which I
    basically said is going to be the price
    of the other order that is already in
    the book. The volume is going to be the
    minimum of volume between our order and
    the one already in the book. And then we
    can go ahead and print and basically say
    um you know here's a trade that's
    happening. And we're going to have to
    adjust both our orders volume and the
    other orders volume by subtracting the
    amount of the trade volume. Then finally
    the last piece of the puzzle is
    basically saying if the other order no
    longer has volume left, we can remove it
    from our book. And we can do that by
    calling the cancel method. Um I'll go
    into the cancel method in a little bit
    because uh we've extracted it away for
    now. Um but it's effectively just going
    to remove the other order from the limit
    order book. And then finally, if we've
    gone through our while loop, we filled
    every single order that we can as part
    of the one that was just placed and
    there's still volume left to be filled,
    you know, so I let's say I wanted 50
    shares of Google and I was able to buy
    45, but now there's five left. I'm going
    to go ahead and put those five left into
    the order book. And I'll go ahead and
    show that helper method in a second.
    Okay, so we've got add order to book
    where I'm basically saying which half of
    the book that I'm putting it in. And I'm
    also giving myself the order node here.
    So now all I'm going to do is say, okay,
    if there's no price uh that uh basically
    corresponds to what the order should be
    going in, we have to create that price
    Q. And once we've created that price Q
    and it exists, we should go ahead and
    put the order in the price queue and
    then furthermore increment the actual
    corresponding volume of the price and
    side corresponding to the order. So easy
    enough, fine. Add order to book, sure,
    just a helper method. Um, and then now
    we actually have cancel order because we
    used this before. So let's go ahead and
    do it again. All the cancel order is
    basically saying is we look for the
    order ID in our order map, which would
    indicate that the node has yet to be
    cancelled. Uh so it's probably somewhere
    in the order book and it hasn't been
    filled either. And basically now all
    that we're going to do is go ahead and
    say okay uh we're going to go in the
    order map. Uh we are going to look at
    our price Q that this node should be a
    part of. We're going to remove the order
    which we got from our hashmap. So this
    is going to be an O of one time because
    I'm assuming that price Q is a doubly
    linked list. And then finally, we're
    going to say if the price Q that this
    order was now a part of is now empty, we
    need to go ahead and remove that price Q
    from the heap. This is going to be that
    login removal. I keep writing N login,
    but that is a typo. And then finally, we
    can go ahead and remove the volume of
    this order from the order map that's
    corresponding to it. And also delete the
    order from uh the order map as well. So
    again, yeah, we're just subtracting the
    volume, deleting the order from the
    order map. Simple enough. We're
    basically just undoing everything that
    we did when adding an order. The last
    piece of the puzzle is getting the
    volume at a specific price where all
    we're literally going to do is call
    volume map uh because we already have
    this, you know, kind of listed out for
    ourselves, which is really great. So, we
    return volume map with a given price on
    the side and we'll get the corresponding
    volume. And, you know, if it's not in
    the hashmap already, we're going to
    return zero. There's nothing in there.
    Easy enough.
    Okay, moving on. Let's go to extensions
    to the problem. I know this is going for
    a while and I really have to poop, but
    whatever. Um, basically, let's imagine
    that no longer do we have limit orders,
    but now we have something called market
    orders. Market orders are basically
    saying, okay, we're no longer specifying
    a specific price that we want to buy at,
    but we're actually just specifying a
    volume. And so, you're going to go ahead
    and uh, you know, fill as many shares of
    the volume as you can. And then, if
    there are still shares remaining left
    over, don't put any order in the order
    book, just get rid of it. Uh, so this is
    pretty simple. we would actually do
    something similar to the limit order.
    We're basically just going to continue
    to run through the heaps as normal,
    right? So, if I'm trying to buy and I
    say, "Let me buy 20 shares. I don't care
    what price they're at. I'm going to
    start from the bottom of the sell order
    book, aka the lowest price that people
    are willing to sell at. And I'm just
    going to keep filling those orders as
    much as possible until I have gotten all
    of my 20 shares." Okay. What is another
    extension to the problem that I've seen?
    I've also seen trigger orders. Trigger
    orders are similar to limit orders, but
    basically you set a price and then the
    second that um the book basically
    crosses that price, the second the
    spread uh or there's a transaction that
    is um basically beyond that price now
    the trigger order is going to basically
    place a given order uh as specified by
    the trigger and trigger orders can even
    trigger other trigger orders. So
    basically all that happens is you're
    running through your algorithm as
    normal, but every single time an order
    is a trade is executed, you can
    basically have separate heaps uh that
    correspond to basically the
    lowest sell trigger order and the
    highest buy trigger order. And then you
    can basically check them that way. And
    once a trigger order is triggered, you
    can put it in a queue of trigger orders
    to run through. Uh, and then you can
    start executing all of the trigger
    orders in a queue before you place any
    new orders or accept any new orders to
    be placed. Annoying, I know. Uh, if you
    guys want me to go into more depth in
    this in the comments, I'm happy to do
    so, but I don't really think it's a main
    part of the video here. All right, guys.
    Well, well done. This was a lot. I know.
    Um, but uh again, you know, if you're if
    you're feeling uh particularly generous,
    I'm feeling particularly accepting. So,
    uh yeah. All right, guys. Well, I hope
    you appreciated the video. Um, like I
    said, this is a problem that, uh, I
    don't really think there's that good of
    like a posted solution online for this.
    Plus, in addition, uh, it is something
    that definitely has come up in
    interviews that I've done in the past.
    And so, uh, yeah, I'd recommend, um,
    learning this one up, especially if
    you're planning on applying to any
    finance companies. But, uh, yeah, best
    of luck, guys.
